process: port on-exit-leak-free to core (#53239)
nodejs/node: doc/api/process.md

or in the [proposal WeakRefs](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-weakrefs?tab=readme-ov-file#a-note-of-caution).

Although you don't know exactly when the callback will be called because of
the GC, you can be sure the callback will be called at least once when the
process exits.

If the object is garbage collected before the `exit` event is emitted, the
callback will be called and will unregister the object from the finalization
registry to not be called again.

```cjs
const { finalization } = require('node:process');

const myDisposableObject = {
  dispose() {
    // Free your resources synchronously
  },
};

function onFinalize(obj, event) {
  // You can do whatever you want with the object
  obj.dispose();
}

finalization.register(myDisposableObject, onFinalize);
```

```mjs
import { finalization } from 'node:process';

const myDisposableObject = {
  dispose() {
    // Free your resources synchronously
  },
};

function onFinalize(obj, event) {
  // You can do whatever you want with the object
  obj.dispose();
}

finalization.register(myDisposableObject, onFinalize);

> ```

Reviewer: This example _will not work_, because the closure is "closed" on the object. See the on-exit-leak free example.

Author: I didn't understand what you mean.

In the example, the object is probably unlikely to be GC, but it will call the dispose when the process exit.

Do you want an example where the object could be GC?

Reviewer: The object will _never_ GC, because a reference is kept in the callback. A strong reference is kept on the callback.

The key point of this feature is to allow the object to be garbage collected, but also to be disposed of during process shutdown.

Author: Initially, I thought the callback was called when the object is GC, but that's not true.

I updated the docs and the examples to try to be more explicit on this behavior.

Specifying a code to [`process.exit(code)`][`process.exit()`] will override any
previous setting of `process.exitCode`.

## `process.finalization.register(ref, callback)`

<!-- YAML
added: REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1.1 - Active Development

* `ref` {Object | Function} The reference to the resource that is being tracked.
* `callback` {Function} The callback function to be called when the resource
  is finalized.
  * `ref` {Object | Function} The reference to the resource that is being tracked.
  * `event` {string} The event that triggered the finalization. Defaults to 'exit'.

This function registers a callback to be called when the process emits the `exit` event.

If the object `ref` is garbage collected before the `exit` event is emitted, the callback will be
removed from the finalization registry, and it will not be called on process exit.

> Inside the callback you can do whatever you want with the object,

Author: This paragraph definitely can be improved, so let me try:

```suggestion
Inside the callback, you can release the resources allocated to that object. 

Also, this callback is called during `exit` event, so be aware that all the limitations of `exit` event are also applied in this callback, such as not being able to use async code since the work queue will not be called.
```

> It also contains a lot of assumptions about how the GC works despite a weak disclaimer about how unreliable GC is at the end. That might be fine for a user-land investigation but being in core it needs more proof-reading from V8 GC people.

Do you have suggestion of people that we can ping?

> It’s also not guaranteed that we will call into JS before exit during exceptional circumstances.

Inside the "Event: 'exit'" docs, there is no explicit mention of exceptional circumstances, if we follow the current docs, the assumption is the `exit` will always be called.

> Inside the callback you can do whatever you want with the object,

Reviewer 2: > Do you have suggestion of people that we can ping?

I think it would be worth asking in the v8-user mailing list or ask in their issue tracker.

  // There are no leaks.
  const myDisposableObject = {
    dispose() {
      // Free your resources synchronously
      stdout.write('disposed.\n');
    },
  };

  finalization.register(myDisposableObject, onFinalize);
}

setup();
```

```mjs
import { finalization, stdout } from 'node:process';

// Please make sure that the function passed to finalization.register()
// does not create a closure around unnecessary objects.
function onFinalize(obj, event) {
  // You can do whatever you want with the object
  obj.dispose();
}

function setup() {
  // This object can be safely garbage collected,
  // and the resulting shutdown function will not be called.
  // There are no leaks.
  const myDisposableObject = {
    dispose() {
      // Free your resources synchronously
      stdout.write('disposed.\n');
    },
  };

  finalization.register(myDisposableObject, onFinalize);
}

setup();
```

The code above relies on the following assumptions:

* arrow functions are avoided
* regular functions are recommended to be within the global context (root)

Regular functions _could_ reference the context where the `obj` lives, making the `obj` not garbage collectible.

> Arrow functions will hold the previous context. Consider, for example:

Author: After some changes requested by Matteo, I thought it would be a good idea to document exactly how the user should use the feature and what they could do to accidentally hold the reference to the object.

What about:
```suggestion
Arrow functions will capture the `this` binding and possibly hold the reference to the `ref` object. Consider, for example:
```

  * `ref` {Object | Function} The reference to the resource that is being tracked.
  * `event` {string} The event that triggered the finalization. Defaults to 'beforeExit'.

This function behaves exactly like the `register`, except that the callback will be called
when the process emits the `beforeExit` event.

## `process.finalization.unregister(ref)`

<!-- YAML
added: REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1.1 - Active Development

* `ref` {Object | Function} The reference
  to the resource that was registered previously.

This function remove the register of the object from the finalization
registry, so the callback will not be called anymore.

```cjs
const { finalization, stdout } = require('node:process');

// Please make sure that the function passed to finalization.register()
// does not create a closure around unnecessary objects.
function onFinalize(obj, event) {
  // You can do whatever you want with the object
  obj.dispose();
}

function setup() {
  // This object can be safely garbage collected,
  // and the resulting shutdown function will not be called.
  // There are no leaks.
  const myDisposableObject = {
    dispose() {
      // Free your resources synchronously

>       stdout.write('disposed.\n');

Author: Do you think is worthy to document this behavior? Also, `console.log` is also not good, maybe `process._rawDebug`?

>       stdout.write('disposed.\n');

Reviewer 3: `_rawDebug` is an undocumented function and should not be used, especially not in an example.

    },
  };

  finalization.register(myDisposableObject, onFinalize);

  // Do something

  myDisposableObject.dispose();
  finalization.unregister(myDisposableObject);
}

setup();
```

```mjs
import { finalization, stdout } from 'node:process';

// Please make sure that the function passed to finalization.register()
// does not create a closure around unnecessary objects.
function onFinalize(obj, event) {
  // You can do whatever you want with the object
  obj.dispose();
}

function setup() {
  // This object can be safely garbage collected,
  // and the resulting shutdown function will not be called.
  // There are no leaks.
  const myDisposableObject = {
    dispose() {
      // Free your resources synchronously
      stdout.write('disposed.\n');
    },
  };

  // Please make sure that the function passed to finalization.register()
  // does not create a closure around unnecessary objects.

>   function onFinalize(obj, event) {

Author: Something like `object.isDisposed`?

>   function onFinalize(obj, event) {

Author: `callRefsToFree` is called synchronously, so I don't think this function can be called twice since we have one instance per process.

>   function onFinalize(obj, event) {

Reviewer 2: We don't get to control when V8 calls the finalization registry tasks, and it can happen after we emit the process exit event to JS land

specific behavior guarantee by the specification. In their words:
"Developers shouldn't rely on cleanup callbacks for essential program
logic. Cleanup callbacks may be useful for reducing memory usage across
the course of a program, but are unlikely to be useful otherwise". You
can read more about the caveats at [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/FinalizationRegistry#avoid_where_possible)
or in the [proposal WeakRefs](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-weakrefs?tab=readme-ov-file#a-note-of-caution).

```cjs
const { finalization, stdout } = require('node:process');

function setup() {
  // This object can be safely garbage collected,
  // and the resulting shutdown function will not be called.
  // There are no leaks.
  const myDisposableObject = {
    dispose() {
      // Free your resources synchronously
      stdout.write('disposed.\n');
    },
  };

  // Please make sure that the function passed to finalization.register()
  // does not create a closure around unnecessary objects.
  function onFinalize(obj, event) {
    // You can do whatever you want with the object
    obj.dispose();

>   }

Author: Can you give me a more detailed explanation about why this is not correct?

Because I think this could be a very common way of using this API:

```js
finalization.register(obj, (ref) => {
  ref.dispose();
});
```

>   }

Reviewer: If you keep the `onFinalize` function inside the `setup` function, it will close upon the `myDisposableObject` and therefore it will _never_ be collected. You need to move `onFinalize` outside of the `setup` function.

>   }

Reviewer 4: Are you sure about that? There's no reason for the engine to close on `myDisposableObject`. It's not referenced by the function.

>   }

Reviewer: It doesn't work that way. The function references the previous closure, which includes `myDisposableObject`.

>   }

Author: I will update the documentation to something like:

```md
The code above uses the following assumptions:
- arrow function is avoided
- regular function is recommended to be on global context (root)

Regular functions *could* reference the context where the `obj` lives, making the `obj` not garbage collectible. 

About arrow functions, they will hold the previous context, so if you write a code like this:

```js
class Test {
  constructor() {
     finalization.register(this, () => this.dispose())
   }
   dispose() {}
}
\```

This object is very unlikely (not impossible) to be garbage collectible, but at least the `dispose` will be called when the `process.exit`.

Again, everything we talked about GC is assumptions that could be changed in the future, so be aware and avoid relying critical things on this feature.
```

<!-- YAML
added: REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1.1 - Active Development

* `ref` {Object | Function} The reference to the resource that is being tracked.
* `callback` {Function} The callback function to be called when the resource
  is finalized.
  * `ref` {Object | Function} The reference to the resource that is being tracked.
  * `event` {string} The event that triggered the finalization. Defaults to 'exit'.

This function registers a callback to be called when the process emits the `exit` event.

If the object is garbage collected before `exit` event is emitted, the callback will be
removed from the finalization registry, and it will not be called on process exit.

Inside the callback you can do whatever you want with the object,
including the release of resources allocated by that resource.

The idea of ​​this function is to help you free up resources when the process exit,
but also let the object be garbage collected if it is no longer being used.

Ex: you can register a stream to be released when the process exit, if the stream is
garbage collected before the process exit, we no longer need to release the stream, so in this case

> we just remove the callback from the finalization registry.

Reviewer: All of them if you don't want to lose data after a `process.exit(1)` is called.
Even `console.log()` might lose data.

(The fact that I had to create a new write stream implementation to solve this problem shows that nobody cared for this shutdown problem).

> we just remove the callback from the finalization registry.

Reviewer 3: @mcollina What you are describing sounds like _flushing_ a stream, and that's not what I would guess based on the current wording.

On a side note, applications should generally explicitly flush streams when necessary. I'm surprised that Node.js isn't flushing `console.log()` before exiting.

> we just remove the callback from the finalization registry.

Author: English is not my native language so that's why the wording is a little bad sometimes, I really appreciate your comments, as soon I have some time I will update the docs based on your suggestions and change the dispose to flush, which describes better the intention here.

> we just remove the callback from the finalization registry.

Reviewer: > I'm surprised that Node.js isn't flushing console.log() before exiting.

Same when I found out.

Note that our streams don't
have a flush() function, so calling "flushing a stream" might be incorrect as well.

Caveats: This function relies on the `FinalizationRegistry` API, which the
authors of this API said to "avoid where possible" because the nature of
how the garbage collector works differently between engines, there's no
specific behavior guarantee by the specification. In their words:
"Developers shouldn't rely on cleanup callbacks for essential program
logic. Cleanup callbacks may be useful for reducing memory usage across
the course of a program, but are unlikely to be useful otherwise". You
can read more about the caveats at [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/FinalizationRegistry#avoid_where_possible)

> or in the [proposal WeakRefs](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-weakrefs?tab=readme-ov-file#a-note-of-caution).

Author: Maybe we can, but there are very few people capable of doing that in C++, and unfortunately, I'm not one of these people.

But this is something we can keep in mind once we get more usage of this API, I want to use this feature in future PRs, so maybe we can get more people involved and interested in improving this behavior.

> or in the [proposal WeakRefs](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-weakrefs?tab=readme-ov-file#a-note-of-caution).

Reviewer 2: The V8 week callbacks can provide a better guarantee. Async hooks are built on top of weak callbacks so it's already possible to use it to build a different finalizer mechanism that's slightly more reliable than finalization registry by letting the object reference an AsyncResource using a WeakMap, and call a callback in the destroy hook of the AsyncResource. Although calling into JS from the weak callback, even in the second pass, is kind of icky and should be avoided if possible IMO.

```cjs
const { finalization, stdout } = require('node:process');

// Please make sure that the function passed to finalization.register()
// does not create a closure around unnecessary objects.
function onFinalize(obj, event) {
  // You can do whatever you want with the object
  obj.dispose();
}

function setup() {
  // This object can be safely garbage collected,
  // and the resulting shutdown function will not be called.

>   // There are no leaks.

Author: No, there's no guarantee when the GC will run

  const myDisposableObject = {
    dispose() {
      // Free your resources synchronously
      stdout.write('disposed.\n');
    },
  };

  finalization.register(myDisposableObject, onFinalize);
}

setup();
```

```mjs
import { finalization, stdout } from 'node:process';

// Please make sure that the function passed to finalization.register()
// does not create a closure around unnecessary objects.
function onFinalize(obj, event) {
  // You can do whatever you want with the object
  obj.dispose();
}

function setup() {
  // This object can be safely garbage collected,
  // and the resulting shutdown function will not be called.
  // There are no leaks.
  const myDisposableObject = {
    dispose() {
      // Free your resources synchronously
      stdout.write('disposed.\n');
    },
  };

  finalization.register(myDisposableObject, onFinalize);
}

setup();
```

The code above uses the following assumptions:

* arrow function is avoided

> * regular function is recommended to be on global context (root)

Author: I explained in the paragraphs later, but essentially patterns that the person using this feature should avoid to not hold reference to the object without need

Arrow functions will hold the previous context, so if you write a code like this:

```js
class Test {
  constructor() {
    finalization.register(this, (ref) => ref.dispose());

    // even something like this is highly discouraged
    // finalization.register(this, () => this.dispose());
   }
   dispose() {}
}
```

It is very unlikely (not impossible) that this object will be garbage collected,
but at least `dispose` will be called when `process.exit`.

Again, everything we talk about GC are assumptions that may change in the future,
so be careful and avoid relying the disposal of critical resources in this feature.

## `process.finalization.registerBeforeExit(ref, callback)`

<!-- YAML
added: REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1.1 - Active Development

* `ref` {Object | Function} The reference
  to the resource that is being tracked.
* `callback` {Function} The callback function to be called when the resource
  is finalized.
  * `ref` {Object | Function} The reference to the resource that is being tracked.
  * `event` {string} The event that triggered the finalization. Defaults to 'beforeExit'.

> This function registers a callback to be called when the process emits the `beforeExit` event.

Author: I will do that, it's way better than just repeat.
